Background: Typhoid and paratyphoid remain common bloodstream infections in areas with suboptimal water and sanitation infrastructure. Paratyphoid, caused by Salmonella Paratyphi A, is less prevalent than typhoid and its antimicrobial resistance (AMR) trends are less documented. Empirical treatment for paratyphoid is commonly based on the knowledge of susceptibility of Salmonella Typhi, which causes typhoid. Hence, with rising drug resistance in Salmonella Typhi, last-line antibiotics like ceftriaxone and azithromycin are prescribed for both typhoid and paratyphoid. Here, we report 23-year AMR trends of Salmonella Paratyphi A in Bangladesh. Methods: From 1999 to 2021, we conducted enteric fever surveillance in two major pediatric hospitals and three clinics in Dhaka, Bangladesh. Blood cultures were performed at the discretion of the treating physicians; cases were confirmed by culture, serological and biochemical tests. Antimicrobial susceptibility was determined following CLSI guidelines. Results: Over 23 years, we identified 2,725 blood culture-confirmed paratyphoid cases. Over 97% of the isolates were susceptible to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and cotrimoxazole, and no isolate was resistant to all three. No resistance to ceftriaxone was recorded, and >99% of the isolates were sensitive to azithromycin. A slight increase in minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) is noticed for ceftriaxone but current average MIC is 32-fold lower than the resistance cut-off. Over 99%, of the isolates exhibited decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin. Conclusions: Salmonella Paratyphi A has remained susceptible to most antibiotics, unlike Salmonella Typhi, despite widespread usage of many antibiotics in Bangladesh. The data can guide evidence-based policy decisions for empirical treatment of paratyphoid fever.

Biological aging of human organ systems reflects the interplay of age, chronic disease, lifestyle and genetic risk. Using longitudinal brain imaging and physiological phenotypes from the UK Biobank, we establish normative models of biological age for 3 brain and 7 body systems. We find that an organ's biological age selectively influences the aging of other organ systems, revealing a multiorgan aging network. We report organ age profiles for 16 chronic diseases, where advanced biological aging extends from the organ of primary disease to multiple systems. Advanced body age associates with several lifestyle and environmental factors, leucocyte telomere lengths and mortality risk, and predicts survival time (AUC=0.77) and premature death (AUC=0.86). Our work reveals the multisystem nature of human aging in health and chronic disease. It may enable early identification of individuals at increased risk of aging-related morbidity and inform new strategies to potentially limit organ- specific aging in such individuals.

Cash transfers are a promising but understudied intervention that may protect cognitive function in adults by promoting their cognitive reserve. South Africa has a rapidly ageing population, however, less is known about the nature of association between cash transfers and cognitive function in this setting. We leveraged natural experiments from Child Support Grant (CSG) age-eligibility expansions to investigate the association between duration of CSG eligibility and cognitive function among biological mothers of child beneficiaries in South Africa. We analysed 2014/2015 baseline data from 944 women, aged 40 - 59 years with at least one CSG-eligible child, enrolled in the HAALSI cohort in Agincourt, South Africa. Duration of CSG eligibility for each mother was calculated based on the birth dates of all their children and the CSG age eligibility expansion years. Cognitive function was measured using a cognitive battery administered to the mothers at baseline interview. Linear regression was used to estimate the association between duration of CSG eligibility, dichotomized as low (≤10 years) and high (&gt;10 years) eligibility, and cognitive function z-scores of the mothers. Our study finds that high duration of CSG eligibility, compared to low, was associated with higher cognitive function z-scores in the full sample [β: 0.15 SD; 95% CI: 0.04, 0.26; p-value = 0.01]. In mothers with one to four lifetime children, but not five or more, high duration of CSG eligibility, compared to low, was associated with higher cognitive function z-scores [β: 0.19 SD; 95% CI: 0.05, 0.34, p-value = 0.02]. Government cash transfers given to support raising children may confer substantial protective effect on cognitive function of mothers in their mid-life. Further studies are needed to understand how parity may influence this relationship. Our findings bring evidence to policymakers for designing income supplementation programmes to promote healthy cognitive ageing in low-income settings.

Elevated vascular disease risk associates with poorer cognitive function, but the mechanism for this link is poorly understood. A leading theory, the structural-functional model argues that vascular risk may drive adverse cardiac remodelling, which in turn leads to chronic cerebral hypoperfusion and subsequent brain structural damage. This model predicts that variation in heart and brain structure should associate with both greater vascular risk and lower cognitive function. This study tests that prediction in a large sample of the UK Biobank (N=11,962). We assemble and summarise vascular risk factors, cardiac magnetic resonance radiomics, brain structural and diffusion MRI indices, and cognitive assessment. We also extract 'heart-brain axes' capturing the covariation in heart and brain structure. Many heart and brain measures partially explain the vascular risk - cognitive function association, like left ventricular end-diastolic volume and grey matter volume. Notably, a heart-brain axis, capturing correlation between lower myocardial intensity, lower grey matter volume, and poorer thalamic white matter integrity, completely mediates the association, supporting the structural-functional model. Our findings also complicate this theory by finding that brain structural variation cannot completely explain the heart structure - cognitive function association. Our results broadly offer evidence for the structural functional hypothesis, identify imaging biomarkers for this association by considering covariation in heart and brain structure, and generate novel hypotheses about how cardiovascular risk may link to cognitive function.

Background: Although disparities in socioeconomic status in health behaviors have been highlighted globally, they are not well understood in Japanese adolescents. The purpose of this study was to clarify the changes in socioeconomic disparities in adolescents' fundamental health behaviors, such as physical activity, screen time (ST), sleep, breakfast intake, and bowel movement before and during COVID-19. Methods: This was a repeated cross-sectional study which used data from the 2019 and 2021 National Sports-Life Survey of Children and Young in Japan. Data of 766 and 725 participants in 2019 and 2021, respectively, were analyzed. Favorable health behaviors were defined as daily moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) of at least 60 minutes, ST of less than 2 hours, sleep of 8 to 10 hours, daily breakfast intake, and bowel movement frequency of at least once in every 3 days. We calculated the slope index of inequality (SII) and relative index of inequality (RII) in each health behavior for equivalent household income levels for assessing absolute and relative economic inequalities. Results: Compliance with MVPA and ST recommendation significantly declined from 20.1% and 23.0% in 2019 to 11.7% and 14.9% in 2021, respectively. The SII and RII increased in MVPA for income levels, but decreased in daily breakfast in 2019 to 2021. Although the widening and narrowing of the disparity was inconclusive for ST, it exacerbated for the higher income groups. Conclusions: Our study revealed widening of economic disparities in the achievement of recommended MVPA and narrowing of it in breakfast intake among adolescents before and during COVID-19.

We investigate the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic on other underlying causes of death in Brazil in 2020 and 2021. We estimate monthly age-standardized mortality rates for 2010-2021 and decompose those time series into three additive components: trend, seasonality, and remainder. Given the long-term trend and historical seasonal fluctuations, we assume that any impact from the pandemic will be left on the remainder. We also decompose the contributions of COVID-19 deaths (direct effect) and those from other causes (indirect effects) to the annual change in life expectancy at birth (e0) from 2017 to 2021. Broadly, the remainder mirrors the trajectory of pandemic waves. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on other causes of death was not limited to increases but also decreases. The direct effects of the pandemic reduced e0 by 1.89 years between 2019 and 2020 and 1.77 between 2020 and 2021. Indirect effects increased e0 by 0.44 between 2019 and 2020 and had virtually no impact on e0 between 2020 and 2021. Whether trajectories in mortality rates and annual gains in e0 will quickly return to pre-pandemic levels depends on governmental actions to mitigate the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Aim Our aim in this paper is to estimate the contribution of different parental specialised health care diagnoses to the subsequent risk of entry into the social assistance system for families with children in the period 1998 2013. Methods We used longitudinal population level register data consisting of all children born in 1997 in Finland and their registered parents (54 960 one and two-parent families with 801 336 observations in the period 1998 2013). Diagnoses assigned in public specialised health care and social assistance records were derived from nationwide administrative registers. Measures of parental socioeconomic status and previous diagnoses and the birth weight of the child were adjusted for in regression models which estimated the association between parental diagnoses and entry into the social assistance system in the following year. Results Families with a parent somatic diagnosis had a risk ratio of 1.4 for social assistance entry in the subsequent year of the diagnosis though substantial variation by diagnosis category was detected. Parent psychiatric diagnoses were linked to a higher, 3.01 fold risk of social assistance entry. Covariate adjustment reduced these risk ratios to 1.2 and 2.1, respectively. Some 2.9 percent of all social assistance entries may be attributed to parental psychiatric diagnoses while somatic health records account for another 7.2 percent, making their total contribution over a tenth of all cases. Conclusion Parental specialised health care records was associated with a higher risk of social assistance need as more interventions to support financial management are required for parents with psychiatric diagnoses.

Fetal growth restriction (FGR) is a leading cause of perinatal morbidity and mortality. Altered placental formation and functional capacity are major contributors to FGR pathogenesis. Relating placental structure to function across the placenta in healthy and FGR pregnancies remains largely unexplored but could improve understanding of placental diseases. We investigated integration of these parameters spatially in the term human placenta using predictive modelling. Systematic sampling was able to overcome heterogeneity in placental morphological and molecular features. Defects in villous development, elevated fibrosis, and reduced expression of growth and functional marker genes (IGF2, VEGA, SLC38A1, SLC2A3) were seen in age-matched term FGR versus healthy control placentas. Characteristic histopathological changes with specific accompanying molecular signatures could be integrated through computational modelling to predict if the placenta came from a healthy or FGR pregnancy. Our findings yield new insights into the spatial relationship between placental structure and function and the aetiology of FGR.

Cash transfers are a promising but understudied intervention that may protect cognitive function in adults by promoting their cognitive reserve. South Africa has a rapidly ageing population, however, less is known about the nature of association between cash transfers and cognitive function in this setting. We leveraged natural experiments from Child Support Grant (CSG) age-eligibility expansions to investigate the association between duration of CSG eligibility and cognitive function among biological mothers of child beneficiaries in South Africa. We analysed 2014/2015 baseline data from 944 women, aged 40 - 59 years with at least one CSG-eligible child, enrolled in the HAALSI cohort in Agincourt, South Africa. Duration of CSG eligibility for each mother was calculated based on the birth dates of all their children and the CSG age eligibility expansion years. Cognitive function was measured using a cognitive battery administered to the mothers at baseline interview. Linear regression was used to estimate the association between duration of CSG eligibility, dichotomized as low (≤10 years) and high (>10 years) eligibility, and cognitive function z-scores of the mothers. Our study finds that high duration of CSG eligibility, compared to low, was associated with higher cognitive function z-scores in the full sample [β: 0.15 SD; 95% CI: 0.04, 0.26; p-value = 0.01]. In mothers with one to four lifetime children, but not five or more, high duration of CSG eligibility, compared to low, was associated with higher cognitive function z-scores [β: 0.19 SD; 95% CI: 0.05, 0.34, p-value = 0.02]. Government cash transfers given to support raising children may confer substantial protective effect on cognitive function of mothers in their mid-life. Further studies are needed to understand how parity may influence this relationship. Our findings bring evidence to policymakers for designing income supplementation programmes to promote healthy cognitive ageing in low-income settings.

Purpose: This study aimed to compare the effects of sodium glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2I) and dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (DPP4I) on new-onset hip fractures. Methods: This was a retrospective population-based cohort study including type-2 diabetes mellitus patients treated with either SGLT2I or DPP4I between January 1st 2015 and December 31st 2020 in Hong Kong. The primary outcome was new-onset hip fracture and the secondary outcome was all-cause mortality. Propensity score matching (1:1 ratio) using the nearest neighbour search was performed. Univariable and multivariable Cox regression were applied to identify significant predictors. Competing risks models and multiple approaches using the propensity score were performed. Results: This cohort included 56393 patients with type-2 diabetes mellitus (median age: 62.1 years old [interquantile range, IQR]: 54.2-71.1; 57.45% males), of which 20432 patients ([incidence rate, IR]: 36.23%) used SGLT2I and 35961 patients (IR: 63.77%) used DPP4I. After the 1:1 propensity score matching, 449 (IR: 1.09%) patients had hip fractures, and 2012 patients (IR: 4.92%) died. SGLT2I was associated with significantly lower risks of hip fractures after adjusting for the demographics, past comorbidities, non-SGLT2I/DPP4I medications and laboratory results (hazard ratio: 0.55; 95% confidence interval: 0.42-0.89; P=0.0036). The results were consistent in the competing risk models and the different propensity matching approaches. Conclusions: SGLT2I was associated with lower risks of new-onset hip fractures after propensity score matching and adjustments.

Objectives: To report the recovery of patients receiving primary allied healthcare after a COVID-19 infection at a six-month follow-up, and to explore which patient characteristics are associated with the changes in outcomes between the baseline and six-month follow-up. Design: Prospective cohort study. Setting: Allied healthcare in Dutch primary care. Participants: 1,452 adult patients recovering from COVID-19 and receiving treatment from one or more primary care allied health professional(s) (i.e., dietitian, exercise therapist, occupational therapist, physical therapist and/or speech and language therapist). Results: For participation (USER-P range 0 to 100), estimated mean differences of at least 2.3 points were observed after six months. For HRQoL (EQ-VAS range 0 to 100), the mean increase was 12.31 at six months. Furthermore, significant improvements were found for fatigue (FSS range 1 to 7): the mean decrease was -0.7 at six months. For physical functioning (PROMIS-PF range 13.8 to 61.3), the mean increase was 5.9 at six months. Mean differences of -0.8 for anxiety (HADS range 0 to 21), and -1.5 for depression (HADS range 0 to 21), were found after six months. Having a worse baseline score, hospital admission and male sex were associated with greater improvement between the baseline and six-month follow-up, whereas age, BMI, comorbidities and smoking status were not associated with mean changes in any outcome measure. Conclusions: Patients recovering from COVID-19 who receive primary allied healthcare make progress in recovery, but still experience many limitations in their daily activities after six months. Our findings provide reference values to healthcare providers and healthcare policy-makers regarding what to expect from the recovery of patients who received health care from one or more primary care allied health professionals. Trial registration: Clinicaltrials.gov registry ([NCT04735744][1]).

